You guys will come back to the course so in this lecture talk about whether or not it's worth it to
hire people as employees and to work with them in person.
Now the vast majority of well known development studios out there they'll have employees.
That's not to say that they don't use contractors extensively but they all do have some form of in-house
staff.
Now that is what makes them resemble more closely a traditional company.
They don't just distribute all of their employees over the world.
Even at Sprint tech we have a little bit of both going on.
We have some full time employees and then we have the majority contractors.
Now that's something that took us a very long period of time to get to.
Mainly because you know at the very beginning we didn't have consistent enough project work to hire
someone for a yearly rate as opposed to just paying them a project rate.
We transitioned into that.
So whether or not you make the decision to hire someone in person at the beginning well that's going
to depend on a couple of things and that's how we're going to cover in this lecture.
Now first off let's do this backwards let's talk about the disadvantages of bringing someone on as an
employee now.
And I'm talking about graphic designer developer for really anyone or anyone that has to do with the
service that you're offering through your development business.
Now having employees and having a set static group of employees that makes it a lot harder to take on
a wider variety of projects.
If you're running a contracted based development group you can be a lot more flexible as to who you
let go and who you hire so that you can take on a much wider variety of projects with employees.
You kind of are stuck to whatever skill set they have.
So if you hire a ruby developer and someone comes to you and says they want their project on in ph P
you're not going be able to take that project whereas if you do this contract easily you could actually
go and look for another subcontractor to do that.
Now obviously if you are an employee you could capture that lead as well by bringing on another contractor.
The difference is that if you do that your other employee the Ruby on Rails is still going to get paid
regardless of whether it only works on a project.
Another big disadvantage of hiring in-house employees is it's it's hard to do and it takes a long period
of time.
It's hard because there's a lot of paperwork.
It's hard because there's a lot of hoops you have to go through.
And it's also hard because because it takes so long for these people to get integrated into your team
it means it's very difficult for you to ramp up on projects to do a big project come through the pipeline
you don't have the manpower.
Now you might not be able to service that with actual traditional employees.
Also if you have a project that grows in size you're doing really well or your clients doing really
well it's going to be very hard for you to ramp up to meet their new demand.
Another reason is that recruiting is incredibly difficult.
If you live in any of the tech hubs now it's really really hard to find people and to entice them to
work with you mainly because there's so much competition for them.
What ends up happening is you end up paying a much higher premium especially if you live on say like
the coast in the United States.
It's probably the same as well if you live in any large metropolitan area even in Europe or Asia.
More demand means higher prices means it's a lot harder to recruit.
Also when you bring someone in as a full time employee you're kind of married to them and kind of what
I mean by that is that it's really difficult to bring them on really difficult to get rid of them.
So you really have to take something monumental to get rid of them.
And a lot of times you just end up making an ideal decisions because the cost of changing the person
or getting someone else is just too high.
Another reason is that housing it's really expensive.
That was some that was the biggest reason why we opted to keep contractors on for Honestly the first
three years of the business in San Francisco.
The stat I just heard was that per employee for office space per year is $40000 so you pay an employee
$80000 that's another $40000 in housing.
Now that's an extreme example.
But housing is just it's an overhead expense that you don't necessarily need.
And the last thing is that off hours are really expensive.
Now let me explain to you the concept of what off hours or off hours are is kind of the in-between time
between when a developers working on a project and when they're not.
Now there's a lot of time that happened so at the end of the day if they you know if they only have
an hour left and they don't have something that can take an hour that's lost time.
If they're in between projects or bringing in a project but it's not coming as fast as you thought it
could be they can end up sitting around for a week to two weeks.
That's expensive because you've to pay them regardless of what they output.
That's how basic employees work.
Now the advantages are a little bit more obvious.
This is why I left these to the second part.
Your project quality and your ability to meet deadlines are going to increase considerably.
The reason why not only do you have a closer feedback loop with your employees.
But because their employees are more willing to work overtime when needed and then to kind of balance
it out at other times because for them it doesn't really matter.
They just didn't get to create good products and to make their clients happy.
They don't really care how many hours they're billing.
Another reason is that your ability to communicate increases considerably so the ability to collaborate
to come up with solutions to problems to come up with new project ideas that increases considerably.
Mainly because your communication lag is just limited.
I mean even when you're talking on Skype there's still going to be some lag in between now if you cut
that lag in half you can communicate twice as fast.
Now the biggest reason I think that employees are a good idea if you're trying to build a development
business is because they have no incentive to cut corners.
That's the biggest drawback to contractors draw contractors.
They're always looking to cut costs because they're either working on a per hour or per project rate
and they're only concerned about whether or not they get paid.
So they're not always in it for the long term.
They don't necessarily care about the finished product.
They care more about billable hours and finishing the one section that they're assigned.
So employees they have a lot more on the line so they can step up when you need them.
Contractors will if they're a good contractor but they're much less likely to do so.
Either way you can do it you know like I said before the big web companies big web studios they all
pretty much do most of it in-house but that's because their angle is that they're going for quality
is paramount.
They only care about quality.
They want to make the best possible.
They primarily work with people who don't even think about budget.
If your product offering and your value proposition is going to be different than that then you might
want to consider contracting because that's going to be a lot easier for you now everybody wants great
product quality right.
And employees get the best product quality.
So you would think if you want the best product quality you'd take employees.
So just like I said before that only makes sense when you're going for always having the utmost quality.
In most cases you need to create some combination.
Contractors are much more flexible in that regard.
So take a moment to consider what you want yourself do you want flexibility or do you want ability in-house
teams are invariably going to have an advantage on product quality and contracting firms are invariably
going to have an advantage on flexibility if you don't have a project for your contractor to work on.
It's not a big deal.
They're in charge of their own product load.
If an employee you run out of a project or a project for them that actually is quite expensive.
So do you see yourself as running this full time or part time.
Is this something that you're more interested in cash or you're more interested in building a brand
and establishing your reputation if you care more about cash and you care more about the kind of the
ratio of how much work you put into this or what you get out of it.
I'd suggest working with contractors if you're trying to do this full time and you're trying to build
this into something really big and you're trying to focus on your reputation and getting a lot of publicity
for the things you've built.
Then you probably want to focus on ploys.
So just one more thing to consider.
Make sure that whatever strategy you use aligns with you yourself and your goals.
That's the most important thing if you build this and aligns to what you want out of it and what you're
capable of.
You're going to be the most successful.
All right.
So in the next lecture.